# **Scrub's Opinions About C99 in 2023**

# Preface

I've been working with C99 for a little while now, having accomplished absolutely nothing noteworthy with it. That's not really a problem with C, that's just a problem with me never committing to anything or sticking with anything as much as I really should.

That really means that you shouldn't take anything I say here too seriously; I'm probably just wrong. But, I read a lot (instead of doing a lot), and so I feel like I'm in an interesting position where I can share what I've observed about the C ecosystem and other people's opinions on it.

# Why C and not C++?

The perpetual question. I think you can just boil this down to complexity issues. C just doesn't have an ever-expanding hyper-complex set of features to explode your head with. Developers don't seem to see simplicity and spartaness as a feature, but I think it is; it gives you less ways to mess up. When you do mess up, the mistake is usually already staring you in the face. There's not too many dark corners where bugs can hide, although when they do slip in they tend to be quite insidious.

When comparing C to C++, I've repeatedly seen C++ programmers handwave the complexity issue, acknowledging it but then making a sort of vague suggestion that *well actually, C is just WAY MORE COMPLEX!!! it just isn't obvious until you have a 20 million line codebase!!!* Maybe it's true that C++ somehow helps with this, but I'm not convinced. When I see a 50 reply cpp reddit comment section debating the best and "correct" way to initialize an object, I just feel like I'm being gaslit. 

As I've read elsewhere, these sorts of issues concerning what should be a fairly simple thing (creating a type...) raise the "ambient complexity" of the environment; you now have to constantly be aware of this shit whether you want to be or not. Not knowing about all the constructor rules, or the rules for any C++ feature you're working with really, means you're walking blind through a razorwire maze, it's quite literally no different than being unaware of undefined behavior. The behavior is defined but you didn't know all the rules, so you still got fucked up.

And man, there sure are a LOT OF RULES to remember when it comes to C++.

C just has fewer features, fewer rules, and fewer ways to bikeshed while working. I think that's a pretty powerful property of C. I found ways to stall anyway but at least it wasn't C's fault.

# Why C and not (insert other language?)
Always one of two issues: the language is either garbage collected, or has low portability, both suck for my purposes which is mostly games. Stuff like Jai, Odin, Zig and Rust are all interesting but until I can run them on a video game console I don't care.

Actual options that meet both criteria are C, C++, and rather confusingly Pascal (sort of). Pascal runs on the Nintendo Switch somehow, lol. Not the other consoles presently, unfortunately.

C# and some Haxe frameworks (Kha, Heaps) both manage the portability concerns, but woops, all garbage collected.

# Some Problems are Overrated

There's lots of whining about macros. Other than ye-olde-classic "windows.h brutally MURDERS your MIN AND MAX" I've not actually heard of any stories where a macro caused a serious problem. I mean I'm sure it's happened at some point...but I can't find anything by anyone. Now, I've definitely had minor compilation errors or misunderstandings of what macros expand to before, but whenever one of these fucks up it's exceedingly obvious and a pretty quick fix. Going overboard is bad I'm sure but some usage is ok.

I keep seeing complaints about typedef struct. Who cares? If I need to know about the internals of a struct, I have to know if it's a struct or something else, and I'll have to take a look at its definition. If the struct is opaque and just meant to be passed into some API, then I don't care if it's a struct or not. Either way, I either --have-- to know about the internals, or I don't, and the struct keyword doesn't really clarify anything in either situation and actually EXPOSES information that I shouldn't have to deal with in the opaque case. Linus got mad about this but several C libs that I've looked at use typedef struct (SDL, PostgreSQL, Redis) and life moves on without issue. POLLUTING THE GLOBAL NAMESPACE!!!... so what? What's the impact of this problem?

# Some Problems are Appropriately Rated

The Standard Library sucks, only a thin subsection of it is actually useful (memXXX functions from <string.h>, malloc/free, <math.h>, printf-family is kind of ok sometimes...). More of it might be useful, but dumb and confusing interfaces make it dangerous or awkward to use.
